On a cool spring morning
The Beavertail Lighthouse Beacon
Cuts the morning fog, a job
That has continued for over 250 years.
Built from stone, concrete and steel,
The present day lighthouse stands
70 feet tall, 100 feet from
The edge of the cliff and
It casts its beam every
Six seconds for 15 miles.
This is in stark contrast
With the original structure built
In 1749 out of wood and whose
Long forgotten foundation was
Unearthed during the hurricane
Of 1938.
Despite the advancement of other
Navigational aids including GPS,
There is nothing like the visual
Flash burning through the mist
To alert mariners of their location
And their proximity to the reefs
And entrance to Narragansett Bay.
Richard Chellis was 2 years old
When his father Carl S. Cehellis
Was the keeper of the Beavertail Light
From 1938 until 1946.
He lived there with his parents
And he has memories of
His father's duties keeping the Beavertail
Lighthouse.
I remember going up the
Stairs of thre Lighthouse when I was about
2 years old and I remember
that Fresnel lens was a very
Polished and a very pristine condition.
Being a Lighthousekeeper meant
That you had to maintain the
Property, you had to keep
The light in working condition.
As I remember my mother saying
When I was growing up recalling
Those years that inspectors would
Periodically show up unannounced
To see how everything was maintained
And what kind of condition
Things were in.
So needless o say you had
To maintain the light at all times you know.
Basically it was a 24 hour a day job,
365 days a year you know.
I mean navigation was essential
For that.
Life was not as difficult
On the Beavertail Lighthouse
Which was built on land
As it was on scores of
Other ligfhthouses that were built
On outposts at sea.
These homes needed supplies
And maintenance which was
Furnished by an early branch
of the Coast Guard
Called the Lighthouse Service.
Robert Dennis worked aboard the
Lighthouse tender "Shrub".
Shrub's duties included attending
and supplying
The lighthouses not accessible
By land and the sometimes
Treacherous job of maintaining
The buoys and navigational
Aids up and down the
New England Coast.
The winter of '39 we
Had alot of ice, the bay was frozen
Way down below Prudence Island.
Every time the tide went out,
The ice would pull these
Navigational aids under the ice,
Put the lamp out and
The buoy would come back up
And it's out, so we had to
Go out to the buoy,
Jump on it, and it was
All covered with ice,
Jump on it, open the lantern
Bale out all the salt water,
Get it dry,light it again
With a match. So that's all
It was a lean torch.
And close it up. The next day
We came out and do it again.
Ice would just sink it,
Just push it over.
there wasn't much you could do,
Just go relight it.
Despite the dedicated and hard work
By these civil servants,
Calamities were unavoidable.
Shipwrecks did occur and still
May occur due to extreme
Weather and human error.
Lifelong Jamestown resident Jim West
Recalls the shipwreck of the early 1930's.
A coal barge came over the
East shoal here between Hull's Cove
And here, went ashore
And we could get down to
The shoal so everybody hauled
Coal that winter.
It was the fall of that year, September.
They didn't want to do
Anything you know until
They sent out the word
That anybody wanted to
Dig coal go down and do it.
So we did.
It was good coal too.
I'll say that.
It was red ash not the white ash,
So it helped out alot of people
That year, I'll tell you
On the coal bill.
As the fog begins to
Burn off, the Beavertail Lighthouse
Beacon fades against the brightening
Morning sky.
In addition to marking the coastline,
This lighthose also houses a museum
That commerates the history
And service of other lighthouses
In addition to the Beavertail Light.